docs: describe the new network configuration subsystem (#3869)
talos-systems/talos: website/content/docs/v0.11/Learn More/networking-resources.md

---
title: "Networking Resources"
weight: 10
---

Talos starting with version 0.11 provides a new implementation of the network configuration subsystem powered by [COSI](../controllers-resources/).
The new implementation is still using the same machine configuration file format and external sources to configure a node network, so there should be no difference
in the way Talos works in 0.11.

> The most notable change in Talos 0.11 is that all changes to machine configuration `.machine.network` can be applied now in immediate mode (without a reboot) via `talosctl edit mc --immediate`.

Author: yep, we should, I will add it, thanks

* `Route` (route to some destination);
* `Link` (network interface/link configuration);
* `Resolver` (list of DNS servers);
* `Hostname` (node hostname and domainname);
* `TimeServer` (list of NTP servers).

Each networking configuration item has two counterparts:

* `*Status` describes the current state of the system (Linux kernel state);
* `*Spec` defines the desired configuration.

| Resource           | Status                 | Spec                 |
|--------------------|------------------------|----------------------|
| `Address`          | `AddressStatus`        | `AddressSpec`        |
| `Route`            | `RouteStatus`          | `RouteSpec`          |
| `Link`             | `LinkStatus`           | `LinkSpec`           |
| `Resolver`         | `ResolverStatus`       | `ResolverSpec`       |
| `Hostname`         | `HostnameStatus`       | `HostnameSpec`       |
| `TimeServer`       | `TimeServerStatus`     | `TimeServerSpec`     |

Status resources have aliases with `Status` part removed, so for example
`AddressStatus` is also avaiable as `Address`.

Talos networking controllers reconcile the state so that `*Status` equals the desired `*Spec`.

## Observing State

> Current networking configuration state can be observed by querying `*Status` resources via

Author: I was torn on whether it should be `networking controllers` vs. `network configuration controllers` or even `network controllers`, as these controllers don't do any networking, they just really set up configuration, but I agree in this sentence it sounds weird

`talosctl`:

```sh
$ talosctl get addresses
NODE         NAMESPACE   TYPE            ID                                       VERSION   ADDRESS                        LINK
172.20.0.2   network     AddressStatus   eth0/172.20.0.2/24                       1         172.20.0.2/24                  eth0
172.20.0.2   network     AddressStatus   eth0/fe80::9804:17ff:fe9d:3058/64        2         fe80::9804:17ff:fe9d:3058/64   eth0
172.20.0.2   network     AddressStatus   flannel.1/10.244.4.0/32                  1         10.244.4.0/32                  flannel.1
172.20.0.2   network     AddressStatus   flannel.1/fe80::10b5:44ff:fe62:6fb8/64   2         fe80::10b5:44ff:fe62:6fb8/64   flannel.1
172.20.0.2   network     AddressStatus   lo/127.0.0.1/8                           1         127.0.0.1/8                    lo
172.20.0.2   network     AddressStatus   lo/::1/128                               1         ::1/128                        lo
```

> In the output there are addresses were set up by Talos (e.g. `eth0/172.20.0.2/24`) and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the output there are addresses set up by Talos (e.g. `eth0/172.20.0.2/24`) and
```

addresses set up by other facilities (e.g. `flannel.1/10.244.4.0/32` set up by CNI).

> Talos networking configuration controllers watch the kernel state and update resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Talos networking controllers watch the kernel state and update resources
```

accordingly.

Additional details about the address can be accessed via the YAML output:

```sh
$ talosctl get address eth0/172.20.0.2/24 -o yaml
node: 172.20.0.2
metadata:
    namespace: network
    type: AddressStatuses.net.talos.dev
    id: eth0/172.20.0.2/24
    version: 1
    owner: network.AddressStatusController
    phase: running
    created: 2021-06-29T20:23:18Z
    updated: 2021-06-29T20:23:18Z
spec:
    address: 172.20.0.2/24
    local: 172.20.0.2
    broadcast: 172.20.0.255
    linkIndex: 4
    linkName: eth0
    family: inet4
    scope: global
    flags: permanent
```

Resources can be watched for changes with the `--watch` flag to see how configuration changes over time.

Other networking status resources can be inspected with `talosctl get routes`, `talosctl get links`, etc.
For example:

```sh
$ talosctl get resolvers
NODE         NAMESPACE   TYPE             ID          VERSION   RESOLVERS
172.20.0.2   network     ResolverStatus   resolvers   2         ["8.8.8.8","1.1.1.1"]
```

## Inspecting Configuration

> Desired networking configuration is combined from multiple sources and presented

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The desired networking configuration is combined from multiple sources and presented
```

as `*Spec` resources:

```sh
$ talosctl get addressspecs
NODE         NAMESPACE   TYPE          ID                   VERSION
172.20.0.2   network     AddressSpec   eth0/172.20.0.2/24   2
172.20.0.2   network     AddressSpec   lo/127.0.0.1/8       2
172.20.0.2   network     AddressSpec   lo/::1/128           2
```

These `AddressSpecs` are applied to the Linux kernel to reach the desired state.

> If, for example, some `AddressSpec` is removed, the address is removed from the Linux network interface as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If, for example, an `AddressSpec` is removed, the address is removed from the Linux network interface as well.
```

`*Spec` resources can't be manipulated directly, they are generated automatically by Talos
from multiple configuration sources (see a section below for details).

If a `*Spec` resource is queried in YAML format, some additional information is available:

```sh
$ talosctl get addressspecs eth0/172.20.0.2/24 -o yaml
node: 172.20.0.2
metadata:
    namespace: network
    type: AddressSpecs.net.talos.dev
    id: eth0/172.20.0.2/24
    version: 2
    owner: network.AddressMergeController
    phase: running
    created: 2021-06-29T20:23:18Z
    updated: 2021-06-29T20:23:18Z
    finalizers:
        - network.AddressSpecController
spec:
    address: 172.20.0.2/24
    linkName: eth0
    family: inet4
    scope: global
    flags: permanent
    layer: operator
```

> One of the important fields is the `layer: operator`, which describes a configuration layer this spec is coming from: in this case, it's generated by a network operator (see below) and is set by the DHCPv4 operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An important field is the `layer` field, which describes a configuration layer this spec is coming from: in this case, it's generated by a network operator (see below) and is set by the DHCPv4 operator.
```

## Configuration Merging

Spec resources described in the previous section show the final merged configuration state,
while initial specs are put to a different unmerged namespace `network-config`.
Spec resources in the `network-config` namespace are merged with conflict resolution to produce the final merged representation in the `network` namespace.

Let's take `HostnameSpec` as an example.

> Final merged representation is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final merged representation is:
```

This can be verified by querying a `HostnameStatus` resource:

```sh
$ talosctl get hostnamestatus
NODE         NAMESPACE   TYPE             ID         VERSION   HOSTNAME                 DOMAINNAME
172.20.0.2   network     HostnameStatus   hostname   1         talos-default-master-1
```

Initial configuration for the hostname in the `network-config` namespace is:

```sh
$ talosctl get hostnamespec -o yaml --namespace network-config
node: 172.20.0.2
metadata:
    namespace: network-config
    type: HostnameSpecs.net.talos.dev
    id: default/hostname
    version: 2
    owner: network.HostnameConfigController
    phase: running
    created: 2021-06-29T20:23:18Z
    updated: 2021-06-29T20:23:18Z
spec:
    hostname: talos-172-20-0-2
    domainname: ""
    layer: default
---
node: 172.20.0.2
metadata:
    namespace: network-config
    type: HostnameSpecs.net.talos.dev
    id: dhcp4/eth0/hostname
    version: 1
    owner: network.OperatorSpecController
    phase: running
    created: 2021-06-29T20:23:18Z
    updated: 2021-06-29T20:23:18Z
spec:
    hostname: talos-default-master-1
    domainname: ""
    layer: operator
```

We can see that there are two specs for the hostname:

> * one from configuration layer `default` specifies hostname `talos-172-20-0-2` (default driven by the default node address);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* one from the `default` configuration layer which defines the hostname as `talos-172-20-0-2` (default driven by the default node address);
```

> * another one from the layer `operator` specifies hostname `talos-default-master-1` (DHCP).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* another one from the layer `operator` that defines the hostname as `talos-default-master-1` (DHCP).
```

> Talos merges those two specs into final `HostnameSpec` based on the configuration layer and merge rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Talos merges these two specs into a final `HostnameSpec` based on the configuration layer and merge rules.
```

> Configuration layers in the order of precedence from low to high:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is the order of precedence from low to high:
```

* `default` (defaults provided by Talos);
* `cmdline` (from the kernel command line);
* `platform` (driven by the cloud provider);

> * `operator` (various dynamic config: DHCP, Virtual IP, etc);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `operator` (various dynamic configuration options: DHCP, Virtual IP, etc);
```

* `configuration` (derived from the machine configuration).

> So in our example `operator` layer `HostnameSpec` overwrites `default` layer producing final hostname `talos-default-master-1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So in our example the `operator` layer `HostnameSpec` overwrites the `default` layer producing the final hostname `talos-default-master-1`.
```

The merge process applies to all six core networking specs.

> For each spec `layer` controls the merge behavior, if multiple configuration specs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each spec, the `layer` controls the merge behavior
If multiple configuration specs
```

## Network Operators

Network operators provide dynamic network configuration which can change over time as the node is running:

* DHCPv4
* DHCPv6
* Virtual IP

Network operators produce specs for addresses, routes, links, etc., which are then merged and applied according to the rules described above.

Operators are configured with `OperatorSpec` resources which describe when operators
should run and additional configuration for the operator:

```sh
$ talosctl get operatorspecs -o yaml
node: 172.20.0.2
metadata:
    namespace: network
    type: OperatorSpecs.net.talos.dev
    id: dhcp4/eth0
    version: 1
    owner: network.OperatorConfigController
    phase: running
    created: 2021-06-29T20:23:18Z
    updated: 2021-06-29T20:23:18Z
spec:
    operator: dhcp4
    linkName: eth0
    requireUp: true
    dhcp4:
        routeMetric: 1024
```

`OperatorSpec` resources are generated by Talos based on machine configuration mostly.
DHCP4 operator is created automatically for all physical network links which are not configured explicitly via the kernel command line or the machine configuration.

> This also means that Talos on the first boot without a machine configuration attempts DHCP on all physical network interfaces by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This also means that on the first boot, without a machine configuration, a DHCP request is made on all physical network interfaces by default.
```

> Specs generated by operators are prefixed with operator ID (`dhcp4/eth0` in the example above) in the unmerged `network-config` namespace:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specs generated by operators are prefixed with the operator ID (`dhcp4/eth0` in the example above) in the unmerged `network-config` namespace:
```

```sh
$ talosctl -n 172.20.0.2 get addressspecs --namespace network-config
NODE         NAMESPACE        TYPE          ID                              VERSION
172.20.0.2   network-config   AddressSpec   dhcp4/eth0/eth0/172.20.0.2/24   1
```

## Other Network Resources

There are some additional resources describing the network subsystem state.

> `NodeAddress` resource presents node addresses excluding link-local and loopback addresses:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `NodeAddress` resource presents node addresses excluding link-local and loopback addresses:
```

10.100.2.23   network     NodeAddress   accumulative   6         ["10.100.2.23","147.75.98.173","147.75.195.143","192.168.95.64","2604:1380:1:ca00::17"]
10.100.2.23   network     NodeAddress   current        5         ["10.100.2.23","147.75.98.173","192.168.95.64","2604:1380:1:ca00::17"]
10.100.2.23   network     NodeAddress   default        1         ["10.100.2.23"]
```

* `default` is the node default address;
* `current` is the set of addresses a node currently has;
* `accumulative` is the set of addresses a node had over time (it might include virtual IPs which are not owned by the node at the moment).

`NodeAddress` resources are used to pick up the default address for `etcd` peer URL, to populate SANs field in the generated certificates, etc.

Another important resource is `Nodename` which provides `Node` name in Kubernetes:

```sh
$ talosctl get nodename
NODE          NAMESPACE      TYPE       ID         VERSION   NODENAME
10.100.2.23   controlplane   Nodename   nodename   1         infra-green-cp-mmf7v
```

Depending on the machine configuration `nodename` might be just a hostname or the FQDN of the node.

> `NetworkStatus` aggregates current state of the network configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`NetworkStatus` aggregates the current state of the network configuration:
```

```sh
$ talosctl get networkstatus -o yaml
node: 10.100.2.23
metadata:
    namespace: network
    type: NetworkStatuses.net.talos.dev
    id: status
    version: 5
    owner: network.StatusController
    phase: running
    created: 2021-06-24T18:56:00Z
    updated: 2021-06-24T18:56:02Z
spec:
    addressReady: true
    connectivityReady: true
    hostnameReady: true
    etcFilesReady: true
```

## Network Controllers

> For each of six basic resource types, there are several controllers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each of the six basic resource types, there are several controllers:
```

> * `*StatusController` populates `*Status` resources observing Linux kernel state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `*StatusController` populates `*Status` resources observing the Linux kernel state.
```

> * `*ConfigController` produces initial unmerged `*Spec` resources in the `network-config` namespace based on defaults, kernel command line, machine configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `*ConfigController` produces the initial unmerged `*Spec` resources in the `network-config` namespace based on defaults, kernel command line, and machine configuration.
```

* `*MergeController` merges `*Spec` resources into the final representation in the `network` namespace.
* `*SpecController` applies merged `*Spec` resources to the kernel state.

For the network operators:

* `OperatorConfigController` produces `OperatorSpec` resources based on machine configuration and deafauls.
* `OperatorSpecController` runs network operators watching `OperatorSpec` resources and producing various `*Spec` resources in the `network-config` namespace.

## Configuration Sources

There are several configuration sources for the networking configuration, which are described in this section.

### Defaults

* `lo` interface is assigned addresses `127.0.0.1/8` and `::1/128`;
* hostname is set to the `talos-<IP>` where `IP` is the default node address;
* resolvers are set to `8.8.8.8`, `1.1.1.1`;
* time servers are set to `pool.ntp.org`;
* DHCP4 operator is run on any physical interface which is not configured explicitly.

### Cmdline

> Kernel command line is parsed for the following options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The kernel command line is parsed for the following options:
```

* `ip=` option is parsed for node IP, default gateway, hostname, DNS servers, NTP servers;
* `talos.hostname=` option is used to set node hostname;
* `talos.network.interface.ignore=` can be used to make Talos skip network interface configuration completely.

### Platform

> Platform configuration delivers cloud environment-specific options, for example, hostname.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Platform configuration delivers cloud environment-specific options (e.g. the hostname).
```

### Operator

Network operators provide configuration for all basic resource types.

### Machine Configuration

> Machine configuration is parsed for link configuration, addresses, routes, hostname,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The machine configuration is parsed for link configuration, addresses, routes, hostname,
```

resolvers and time servers.
Any changes to `.machine.network` configuration can be applied in immediate mode.

## Network Configuration Debugging

Most of the network controller operations and failures are logged to the kernel console,
additional logs with `debug` level are available with `talosctl logs controller-runtime` command.

> If the networking configuration can't be established and API is not available, `debug` level

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the networking configuration can't be established and the API is not available, `debug` level
```
